---
layout: post
title: Eventual Consistency is a Business Concern
comments: true
tags: [SOA, Eventual Consistency]
---
Eventual consistency is an important concept in distributed systems as it allows you to scale considerably and improves your systems' availability and robustness. There are numerous blog posts discussing this in details so I'm not going to do that here. What I want to emphasise in this post is that eventual consistency is a business concern. 

Eventual consistency affects the end users directly as it drastically alters the way the product is used and can sometimes diminish the user experience. Therefore, it is a business decision and not something that the developers alone can determine and implement. Retrofitting eventual consistency onto a system is extremely difficult, not just from a technical prespective but from a business one too. Take for example an online booking system for sporting events, in a strongly consistent system, the customers are presented with a picture of the venue and the seats available and allowed to select which seats they want and book them. In an evenually consistent system, the customers are asked how many tickets they want, in what category and they are given a confirmation that there request has been received and that they must await confirmation of their booking by, let's say, e-mail. This represents a significant difference in terms of customers' experience, as in the first instance, customers have a confirmed booking; while in the second one they don't. Now imagine having to change your application from the first one to the second, is this something you can do without business approval? Even in greenfield projects, the business has to know what they are agreeing to. Would they be happy with the second approach? can you make that call on their behalf? 


It is not a decision to be taken lightly and cannot be taken by technical people alone. The business has to understand the impact this has on the product. Sometimes, even an understanding is not enough as a lot of people don't fully grasp the impact until they see it and try it out. Hence, start with eventual consistency and iron out all the misconecptions early when it is easier to change as it is not trivial and gets harder the more you invest in it and the later you have to change it.

There are ways to decrease the effect eventual consistency has on the customers but these have to be agreed with the business. For example, events can be overbooked and there is a corrective action/process already defined by the business; hence, you can improve the user experience by treating customers as if they actually have a confirmed booking. Another example would be creating a user in, let's say a forum.... {e.g. user name not unique but allowed to post and e-mail sent out to correct name} etc...
